Oh, there you go.
Okay.
So for those of you who
saw the keynote yesterday,
you probably noticed that Apple's
been rather busy this year.
And open source has certainly
been no exception for us.
So there's going to be a
veritable cavalcade of speakers
coming up here after me to
describe their various projects.
But I'll give sort of a general overview
and introduce the first of them.
These are also some important resources.
As always, you can find our most recent
Darwin sources and pointers
to other important open source
projects at developer.apple.com.
OpenDarwin.org is another project we
launched about a year ago in cooperation
with the Internet Software Consortium.
So you can get information
there at OpenDarwin.org,
and that's been very successful for us.
And then, of course,
we have our wonderful Fink brethren,
who have a Fink.SourceForge.net address.
And then, of course,
have to mention FreeBSD.
Yay!
So let me talk a little
bit about OpenDarwin.
They've started doing something we
really hoped could be done by an external
but yet loosely affiliated project,
which is producing their own
Darwin standalone releases.
Those of you who ran the
Apple Darwin releases might
have noticed that they tended
to come out fairly seldom,
and there were general issues
with them that we didn't always
have the engineering resources
to fix in a timely manner.
So with the additional volunteer
resources that OpenDarwin.org
brings to the table,
they've been able to do some
very high quality releases of
Darwin for both the x86 and PowerPC.
So we're very happy to see that.
Another thing that they've been doing is
providing RPMs for all of the components.
So you now have an RPM database
installed that you can query
to see where various components
belong or where they came from.
Obviously updates and whatnot
are possible in the future.
They're not doing that yet,
but that's certainly an option.
They're doing that in conjunction now
with real package management behind the
operating system and they're providing
SRPMs which correspond directly to
what they use to build the binary bits.
The Darwin Ports Project,
which you'll also hear quite a bit more
about in this chain of presentations,
has been doing what it can to bring more
third-party software to the platform.
And they have a WebDAV mountable
packages collection already
at packages.opendarwin.org.
So you can simply connect to that
in the finder and double-click on
one of the packages there and poof.
Well,
I don't mean that the way it sounds.
and many more.
I mean, bingo.
That's the word.
So we've also changed the way
we do open source releases.
In the past,
what we did was we essentially
just pushed out copies of our live
CVS repository at periodic intervals,
and we had some stuff that was just live,
you know, on a minute-to-minute basis.
And that was cool from the
perspective of being able to see
sort of the work in progress,
but what it really didn't do was
give you any directly correspondent
bits to Mac OS X or Darwin,
e.g., you didn't know that what
you were looking at in CVS was
what you were actually running,
nor were those bits necessarily
compilable at any given time because
you were looking at top of tree.
There might be works in progress.
There were obviously synchronization
issues between different projects.
One might be n steps ahead of another,
but there's interdependencies because
someone hasn't checked that stuff in yet.
So we looked at that,
and what we started doing instead
is breaking our releases into what
we call on-cycle and off-cycle,
which is on-cycle releases are
snapshots of the exact sources
that we use to build the product.
So now when you get an on-cycle snapshot,
you know it corresponds to a
given release of Mac OS X or a
given software update of Mac OS X,
and they're synchronized together because
we didn't have the tag information
exported before that would have let
you sort of read through the data.
So we're able to sort of recreate
that state of affairs for yourself.
And some stuff is still done off-cycle.
Darwin streaming server, rendezvous, GDB,
GCC, various GPL projects,
you can still get the
CVS top of tree for that.
So we're not doing it for
absolutely everything,
but for the majority of the bits,
we're trying to move
to an on-cycle model.
The source is now available
via web DAV as well as CVS,
so you can mount the appropriate volume
and just drag the sources around.
And we're continuously adding.
So we're continuously adding.
We're continuously adding to what we've
previously released as open source.
There's a lot of new open
source initiatives at Apple.
Some of those.
You've probably heard the
announcements about WebCor.
So the Safari folks have been working
very closely with the KHTML team,
and you'll hear more about
that in this presentation,
and the JavaScript stuff as well.
Of course, there's also the X11
product now and the SDK.
And we've been working all
over the map in the third-party
software and FreeBSD areas to
update components of Mac OS X.
We have a new TCL, new Python, new Perl,
new Samba.
We've synced up LibC with
FreeBSD 5.0 to bring in all the
WCharty support and thread safety.
So there's too many projects to mention
that we've synchronized for Panther.
So coming up next,
we'll have someone from the
Open Darwin project talk a little bit
more about Open Darwin and Darwin ports.
So let me introduce him now.
Kevin Van Vechten of
the Open Darwin project
and recently of Apple.
I'm here to talk a little bit
about the Open Darwin project.
Open Darwin, as was mentioned,
was started about a year ago.
And what it is, is a community supported
site outside of Apple.
It's hosted by the
Internet Software Consortium.
Neither the ISC nor Apple exercise
editorial control over Open Darwin.
So what that means is Open Darwin is
free to explore technologies that maybe
Apple doesn't feel is very high priority,
but the developer community as a whole
would like to see incorporated in Darwin.
And once it's working there,
we can advocate within
Apple incorporating those changes
into a future Mac OS X release.
Open Darwin provides
support for Darwin users.
It provides mailing lists,
how-to articles, documentation.
It provides a lot of information
for using various Darwin commands,
which of course are also
applicable to Mac OS X.
And most importantly,
Open Darwin provides
resources for developers.
We provide the same mailing lists
and documentation for information
relevant to porting third-party
open source Unix software to Darwin.
And just kind of being a central point
for information about Darwin development.
Which of course directly
applies to Open Darwin.
And that's why we're so
excited to be here today.
And we're excited to be here
today to talk about the Mac OS X,
because a lot of key
Mac OS X technologies like I/O Kit and
Core Foundation are also part of Darwin.
So one of our primary goals in OpenDarwin
is to stay synchronized with Mac OS X.
We recognize there's a much larger
developer community around Mac OS X than
there is focused on pure Darwin.
So as much as possible,
we want to make it easy to take
individual components of the
Darwin operating system from OpenDarwin.
You could compile them on your
own and substitute a piece of
Mac OS X with the custom component.
As part of that,
we provide binary releases of
Darwin and components of Darwin.
So if you're interested in
playing with a particular version,
there's a place where you can go.
It would be pre-built.
You could download it, install from a CD.
We also are working to provide an easy
build system for Darwin so that you
can look at any particular library,
command, build it quickly and easily,
modify it a little bit, rebuild it again,
install it on your system,
and use that for debugging,
for development.
And also, importantly,
is OpenDarwin's a staging
area for external development.
So, for example,
in our current OpenDarwin sources,
we have some of OpenBSD's sys trace
work as an experiment for dealing with
access control on various sys calls.
We also have FreeBSD commands brought
over from the FreeBSD project,
integrated into OpenDarwin,
and we've also got some of the open
source projects that we've tested there,
and then they were able to bring some of
those in as part of Panther to keep us
up to speed and keep us synchronized with
the other open source projects out there.
So OpenDarwin focuses a lot on
open collaboration for developing
software that pertains to Darwin and,
of course, Mac OS X as a whole.
We host projects relevant to Darwin.
For example,
KDE Darwin is currently hosted there.
It's one of our larger
projects in terms of code base.
DarwinPorts, as mentioned,
is another project hosted at OpenDarwin,
which is one of our more active projects.
We provide the infrastructure so that
people can create projects and allow
developers from the community to sign up,
get access to CVS.
And we're also working to have a mirrored
version of a lot of the Apple projects,
say Streaming Server or HeaderDoc.
Eventually, we want to see some of those
in a repository at OpenDarwin.
So third-party and community
contributions can be put into CVS there,
tested, integrated,
and then advocated back at Apple.
So that's a potential enhancement
or bug fix or whatever.
So the Darwin Ports project,
being one of the most active
projects at OpenDarwin,
is a project designed to port
open source software to Darwin.
Its main focus is the easy installation,
removal, and upgrading of software
from source or binaries.
The binary support is
still a work in progress.
One of the reasons why I'm mentioning
it here in OpenDarwin is there's
a fair chance that we'll be using
Darwin Ports as means of building the
individual components of the underlying
Darwin operating system at OpenDarwin,
so that there would be a port for each,
not only third party and
open source Unix software,
but also for each of the
components of Darwin.
So it would be as easy as saying,
you know,
build and install a core foundation
on a single command line,
and it could do that for you.
There's also a Cocoa user
interface to Darwin Ports.
It lets you browse through all the
available software that currently
has a port file representation.
You can choose what you want to build,
click on it, it'll build,
install on your system.
So the most important thing I want to
mention today is that OpenDarwin really
is a third party independent project and
it does need your help to be successful.
And if everybody joins the
mailing list and discuss any
Darwin technical issues they have,
it can really be a good central
resource for development for Mac OS X,
for Darwin,
for porting Unix applications.
Also, we have a Bugzilla
database at OpenDarwin,
so there's a good opportunity
to report any bugs with Darwin,
with any libraries or
commands there at OpenDarwin,
as well as submitting a patch or at
least making a reference to saying,
well, this isn't a problem in NetBSD or
this isn't a problem in FreeBSD.
And then somebody at OpenDarwin
can take a look at that,
figure out what needs to change,
and we can incorporate
that back into Mac OS X.
There's a couple mailing
lists at OpenDarwin.
If you're interested in proposing
projects relevant to Darwin or
discussing new features or enhancements,
that would be appropriate for
the discuss list at OpenDarwin.
If you're interested
in submitting patches,
code, documentation,
that is appropriate for the
hackers list at OpenDarwin.
and there's a couple interesting
other sections pertaining
to open source and Darwin,
QuickTime Streaming Server, Rendezvous,
GCC, Unix sysadmin tools.
And up next is Don Melton and he'll
be talking a bit about Safari.
Hi, I'm Don Melton.
I'm the Internet Technologies Manager at
Apple Computer,
and I'm here to talk to you today
about Safari and open source.
And I'll give you a little
roadmap to some other sessions
here at the conference.
[Transcript missing]
Why is Safari so successful?
I mean, because people are not
only downloading it,
I think 5 million so far,
something like that,
they're actually also using it.
Some of them are making it
their default web browser.
I think of three reasons
why it's so popular.
First off, innovative features.
It's got a superior user experience.
This is a full featured web browser.
People take it seriously.
It can do things for you.
Secondly, solid quality.
Real world compatibility with the web.
By that I mean pages
look the way you expect,
and they look the way web
designers expect them to look too,
especially if they
write to web standards,
but hey, even if they don't.
But most importantly,
impressive performance.
It's the fastest browser on Mac OS X.
We beat everybody not only
on the standard benchmarks,
but we also beat them
in just real world use,
loading pages, scrolling, reading.
Resizing, launching especially.
1.0 is faster.
And now the underlying technology within
Safari is built right into Mac OS X.
And it's this underlying technology that
I want to talk a little bit about today
because it's based on open standards.
Firstly,
it's based on W3C standards like HTML4,
XML, CSS, DOM, so on and so forth.
But more importantly,
it's based on open source.
And that's open source
from the KDE project.
The KDE project,
as many of you might know,
is an open source desktop available
on Linux and other Unix platforms.
It has all sorts of applications
and utilities and libraries.
And one of the big applications
is the Conqueror web browser.
And the Conqueror web
browser uses two libraries.
Thank you.
Two libraries, KHTML and KJS.
And we're using those same
libraries within Safari.
First, we're using it in a
framework called WebCore,
which is just an adapter
built on KHTML from KDE.
It uses most of the KHTML sources,
about 95% of them.
And it has glue code to
the rest of Mac OS X,
which has also been open sourced.
We also use JavaScript Core,
which is just a simple wrapper around
the KJS JavaScript interpreter,
also from KDE.
But that's not all.
Safari also contains other
open source components in
WebCor and in JavaScript Core,
such as the XPAT XML parser,
the PCRE regular expression library,
and even, shock,
portions of Mozilla code.
I mean, a lot of people are actually
surprised at that when they
go perusing through WebCor.
So why open source?
It's all about the technology.
It's not just that it's
a good development model,
but for us, it was a technology decision.
KHTML and KGS are just
tremendous technologies.
I'd like to tip my hat to KDE developers
for their fine work for that.
And let me just go into
detail as exactly why.
One, it's small.
KHTML and KGS together are
about 140,000 lines of code.
That's almost an order of
magnitude smaller than some
other projects and web browsers.
and it's fast because if
you have less source code,
you've got less binary code.
Less binary code means
you execute things faster.
It's also designed for speed.
It's really designed well.
and it's easy to modify.
This is a fun source base to hack.
It's just a hoot to get in
there and mess around with it.
It's easy to understand.
There's not layers and layers
of abstraction to figure out.
It's very, very straightforward.
And we've tried to maintain that
with the rest of our development.
Okay,
what are we doing with the community?
First off,
we're working with the KDE team.
These are great folks.
We're on mailing lists with them.
We've had at least one transatlantic
phone conference call with the KDE team,
KHML and KJS developers.
And Hari Porten, the lead on KJS,
has actually been out to the
Cupertino campus to visit with us.
So they're great folks.
We're giving back all of our
bug fixes and enhancements
in WebCor and JavaScriptCor.
And we also send patches on the mailing
list to the development team at KDE.
We're also taking in patches and
other changes from the community.
In fact, just a few weeks before
Safari 1.0 went out,
David Heitz snuck in another little
feature from the Tip a Tree KDE.
and we're sharing ideas
and plans for the future.
When we work on something and we know
we're gonna be down in section of code
base and we might be pulling it apart,
heads up guys,
we're gonna be redoing the plumbing
on this and the KDE folks have
done the same thing with us.
When Lars Noll,
who's the lead on KHTML said,
"I'm gonna be mucking
with the CSS parser,
stay out of that." We went, "Great,
just tell us when it lands so we
can take it." And that's one of the
things that went into our beta too.
We're also planning,
now that we've survived our 1.0 release,
and boy am I glad that we did that,
we're going to have another
one of those Transatlantic
Conference calls with the folks there.
But you can contribute too.
And that's the other thing that
I wanted to talk about today.
You can contribute not
only to our projects,
WebCor and JavaScriptCor,
but you can also contribute
to KHTML and KJS because,
hey, it's the same code.
I mean, it's just fine with us and we'll
get it from tip of tree and we'll
swap patches back and forth.
We would love to get bug fixes,
enhancements,
and even other ideas from the community.
If you go to the Apple open source site,
you can find the mailing
list that you can join.
You can get the tar balls of the
current versions of WebCor and
JavaScriptCor and jump in.
We really look forward to that.
Now I'd like to point out a couple of
other sessions here at the conference.
I'd like to say I'll be here all week.
Come at 2 o'clock to the Safari overview.
It's upstairs in the Presidio room.
And I'll be rambling on
there for about an hour.
And then tomorrow,
Safari technology and web standards,
if you care about web standards.
Darren Adler will go into detail for it.
We're going to be covering some of the
new APIs and foundation on Thursday.
There's an overview of networking
that might be useful for some of you.
And the marvelous web kit on Friday.
And some lower level plumbing
that folks might be interested.
CF network in depth also on Friday.
Thanks so much.
And I'd like to call
Richard Blanchard to the stage.
And talk about it.
printing.
Hello.
I'm Richard Blanchard.
I'm the Apple engineering
manager for printing.
And today I'm going to give
you a little bit of insight in
what we've been doing with our
printing projects inside of Darwin.
A year ago in this exact session,
I was incredibly pleased and excited to
announce that we were including CUPS,
Common Unix Printing System,
into Darwin and into Mac OS X.
And that's the basis of our
Jaguar printing system and
our Panther printing system.
Over the last year,
I spent a lot of time rolling
important fixes from the ongoing
CUPS mainline development.
We used CUPS 1.1.15.
CUPS since then has moved on to .16, .17,
.18.
We've taken bug fixes from those
changes and security fixes and
rolled them back onto our .15 base.
That's kept us pretty busy.
Over that year,
I've been reading some postings
from people who were concerned,
maybe was the right word,
that we were maybe stagnating.
Darwin and Mac OS X was
using this .15 base.
Meanwhile, CUPS was running ahead and
was all the way up to .18.
That's just not the case.
As I said,
we've been moving these bug fixes back.
But the reason I really bring
that up is not because I'm really
oversensitive to these posts.
But instead, it's because there's an
important point there.
One of the reasons we went to
CUPS to an open source printing
system was for transparency.
It was so the developers could look,
see what we were doing,
give us feedback before we
actually made a major release.
And in that same vein,
our CUPS repository,
our CVS repository is part of Darwin,
is live every day.
So you can go on to Darwin and
see what we've done any given day.
And we've had our
Panther CUPS development,
which is based on 1.19,
up there for some time.
So again, for Panther we're using 1.1.19.
There are some important
changes in there,
important fixes, important features.
There are some bindings
for new languages,
so there are Java bindings now.
That'll be in Panther.
PHP and Perl bindings,
so you can actually make CUPS calls,
create printers,
and print directly without going through
the print system from those languages.
There's fax support,
which is important if you saw the
keynote last night or yesterday morning.
IPP collections,
which allows us to do some
better error handling,
and improved PPD support.
The PPD parser in 1.1.19 is much
tighter than it was in earlier versions.
It'll flag PPDs that are bad much
more easily or much more clearly.
And it also allows access
to most of the PPD keywords,
whereas the earlier
PPD libraries did not.
GIMP Print has been out there,
has been used by a lot of our users,
as has HPI.js.
This is actually one of the most
exciting things about using CUPS,
is that the world of open source
printer drivers is available to
our users and to our developers.
And this has really been
great over the years,
supporting some older printers
that maybe the vendors haven't
gotten around to supporting.
As you can see,
GIMP Print supports over 500 printers
from most of the major printer vendors.
HPI.js supports a couple
hundred HP printer models.
That's a lot of legacy printer support,
and it's been great for us.
There's also been some important
support from some of our Linux cousins.
If you go to linuxprinting.org,
you'll see some great Mac OS X printing
pages supporting these two packages.
So I encourage you to go look at those.
This wasn't stolen for the keynote,
and I'm very happy.
I get to announce today that
GIMP Print's actually going to
be part of Darwin and Panther.
So we'll have those drivers
in there by default.
Ready?
There you go.
But there's more.
As you saw the keynote,
there's also Fax in Panther.
And following our printing tradition,
what we wanted to do is
take an open source core,
put that into Darwin,
and then build on top of
it in our commercial OS.
So we used eFax.
If anybody knows the
Fax landscape out there,
there's really two different
open source projects.
There's eFax, which is very small.
It's not an incredibly active project.
And there's HiLiFax,
which will do everything
you'd ever want in faxing,
and it's a lot larger.
We actually went with a smaller project.
It seemed to fit our goals more cleanly.
So we've got eFax.
It's in the Darwin repository right now,
and it'll be in Panther,
and it's available for you.
I'll be talking Thursday, much longer,
about printing in Mac OS X Panther,
but also going over some of
these Darwin printing projects.
So again,
the most important message I have
for you today is we have three
projects now that are tied to
printing that are all in Darwin.
We have CUPS, the print server.
We have GIMP Print,
a set of printer drivers.
And we have eFax for our fax port.
All three of those projects
are live every day.
I encourage you to,
if you're interested in any of those,
track our changes every day.
Send us mail.
Let us know, hey, this change was wrong.
Hey, we should pick up this other change
that was coming from another project.
We do this so we can be incredibly
transparent to you so you know what
we're doing for our OSes before
we have to release the GM version.
So anything you do to help
us would be much appreciated.
So I'm going to introduce Torrey Lyons.
He's going to come up here
and talk about XFree86.
So XFree86 has a fairly long
history on Mac OS X comparatively,
at least as far as this
operating system goes.
The initial Darwin support was in
the late 2000 with XFree86 4.0.2.
In this release,
you had to shut down core graphics.
XFree86 would talk through the
IOCAD directly to the hardware.
Then in subsequent releases,
we added the ability to
run in parallel with Aqua,
where you could have two separate virtual
screens and switch back and forth.
And then we added a
rootless mode in early 2002,
and that's culminated in the 4.3 release,
which gives us faster 2D and
hardware-accelerated OpenGL.
Now, of course,
the thing that's missing from here,
or is yet to come,
is the 1.0 release of Apple's X11.app,
which is a very exciting
thing in this area.
And as most of you probably know,
that's based on the XFree86 code base.
At least their current beta is based
on XFree86 4.0 and Apple's X11.app.
So, what are we planning to
do in the XFree86 project?
Of course,
the most important thing for us
is to get the lot of good changes
that Apple's made in releasing X11
merged into the XFree86 code base.
There's a win-win situation if we can
get Apple's X11.app and the XFree86 open
source release tightly synchronized.
And we're working hard on that.
And what really makes that
possible is this XPlugin API,
which allows open source developers to
really write high-performance X servers.
The problem we had sort of at the
end of the 4.3 development is that
essentially what we're trying to do is
we're trying to write an XWindow server
on top of another Windows server,
which is Core Graphics.
And there weren't existing public
APIs in Mac OS X that allowed us
low enough level access to get
the performance we really needed.
So, in discussions with Apple,
what really emerged was that
actually Core Graphics has
all the capability we need,
but that there aren't -- the APIs we
needed aren't private APIs that are
hidden and not exposed and therefore
not suitable for open source code.
So, what XPlugin is,
is it's a library that is
exactly what you need to write an
X server on Mac OS X and no more.
So, it's fairly easy for us to write an
So, it's fairly easy for Apple to
maintain as they go forward.
And it also allows open source
developers sort of a green
light to go ahead and write very
high-performance X servers on Mac OS X.
And this is really the big news as
far as my part of the talk is that --
Apple's X11 we would think of as
the first implementation of an
X server using this X plugin API.
And actually, if you check it out,
you can check out their
beta 3 source code.
You'll see it's XFree86 with
acceleration features added in,
and they're just using OpenGeo,
Core Graphics, and this X plugin API.
So we'd also,
in addition to making things go faster,
we'd also like to make them better.
So we're working on adding multiple
visuals of various classes and depths.
The common problem here is that you
want to display an 8-bit pseudocolor
visual and a 24-bit true color display.
And actually,
beta 3 has a way of doing this.
It has some problems.
We think there's a slightly
more general implementation
that we're going to put in.
And we also, of course, moving forward,
want to support new XFree86 standards.
Of course,
the key reason to have a version of
X11 running on Mac OS X is it's an
essential compatibility environment for
scientific and Unix developers and users.
And compatibility environment is
only so good as you stay compatible
with the latest stuff coming out
in the rest of the community.
So I've listed some things
here that we're working on.
R&R, XCursor,
ability to add cursors with alpha
channels that are coming out on other
platforms in the XFree86 project.
And we'll be including those in
our Mac OS X support as well.
The last thing we'd like to do,
now that the picture on Mac OS X for
X server is getting pretty robust,
we'd like to add,
or at least turn our eyes
back to I/O Kit mode.
And the top of the tree already
has some improvement with this.
This is of interest to those of you who
run Open Darwin or Pure Darwin without
the rest of the Mac OS X goodness.
We'd like to get I/O Kit closer to the
kind of performance you'd expect in
other open source operating systems.
And what's available,
if you build from the
top of the tree today,
I suggest you do if you're
running Pure Darwin,
you'll notice that the drawing
performance is much better.
It uses shadow FB instead of trying
to draw directly to the frame buffer.
And that's much better than
what you see in the 4.3 branch.
So of course we always need help.
And if you're interested in helping,
I'd suggest you stop
by devel@xfree86.org.
That's the sort of central mailing
list for xFree86 development.
And these are some talks that would
be useful to understand a little bit
the environment that we're working
in here to implement an X server.
So next we're going to have Ed Peterlin
come up and talk about OpenOffice.
[Transcript missing]
Today, it's really a lot of fun.
I was here a year ago saying,
we got a compiling, we need your help.
Yesterday, we went gold master.
OpenOffice.org 1.0 is here.
We support Mac OS X and we
finally refactored everything to
support Darwin PowerPC as well.
So now you have a full office
productivity suite on Darwin.
Truly amazing.
It runs on Mac OS X with X11 graphics and
I'm actually pleased to say it does run
on Panther with the X11 on the second CD.
Take the installer, it runs.
It just runs.
And yesterday,
another thing people may not be aware of,
we released simultaneously in over
20 languages at the same time.
Italian, Greek, French, Dutch.
All of these users now
have localized versions of
OpenOffice.org in their language.
I was here one year ago as one person.
Since then, I got another core developer,
a volunteer, of course.
We all have real jobs and real lives.
Two people, and we moved...
Two people, never more than six,
moved seven and a half million
lines of source code in only a year.
This is an amazing operating
system and this would not be
possible without the synergy of open
source on this operating system.
You know what?
It really is a thing of beauty.
This is the X11 version.
Full anti-aliasing.
You have access to all
of your OS X fonts.
It's really nice,
and you can go get it today.
We're doing CDs here because she's
got a little around the edges.
Just a little more than
the other platforms,
about 100 megs more than
the other platforms.
But since we've given out CDs yesterday,
approximately 5% of everyone at
this conference now has it on CD.
Okay.
Yes,
you can see us in the exhibitors booth.
A lot of heavy drinking
went into the CDs,
so appreciate them.
But you know what?
This proves one thing.
We're a great community and
we're a community of doers.
But you know what?
We don't need doers.
We need dreamers.
We're not stopping here.
This is the beginning.
You know what?
Guys, the hard stuff is done.
It all works.
We've got to move forward.
We've got to plow forward.
OpenOffice.org 1.1 is going live on other
platforms with some amazing features.
Improved scriptability support
for writing full infrastructures
and middleware on this as a
cross-platform delivery solution.
Mind-blowing.
You can run your same middleware on OS X,
Windows, you can throw it back on
a Solaris box if you need,
or if you don't have a G5 or can't
afford it like me because I'm poor.
And also vertical and
right-to-left languages.
We're beginning to get CJK support,
Arabic, doing BIDI.
But you know what?
That's not enough.
So why don't we replace X11?
We're going to use core
graphics and quarts.
And we're going to get
it running right on OS X.
We're going to have tighter
Mac OS X integration.
We have visions of integrating
with services so we can start
exchanging everything with
mail and other applications.
Finally, getting the clipboard working.
and of course, Aqua User Interface,
the one that everyone wants.
That's not a mock-up.
This is a prototype.
This has been out there and
available for six months.
Go out, get it, look at it.
Help us try and find out how we can
do this properly and do it right.
Now's the time for you to jump in.
All you people who weren't
core hackers before,
who were afraid to touch make files,
now you can start.
And today I'm also pretty
pleased to announce,
if you're not a core graphics developer,
if you're not a Node 10 developer,
there are Java guys out there too.
We have a full Java prototype
project that is now up using
Java 2D only for the drawing.
99% C++, Java 2D for the drawing.
And the amazing thing,
it's only a week old,
but it supports Japanese text
input on Mac OS X in Unicode.
That's phenomenal.
Basically, come.
Help us find out where we're going to go.
This is everyone's thing.
You can actually put part of you into it.
We need UI design experts
trying to figure out how to
make this right for a Mac user.
We need graphic artists who can actually
come and draw all new icons for us,
get the interface working.
Cocoa developers,
help us find out how we can move
this to Interface Builder and all
these other great Apple technologies.
We need courageous testers who aren't
afraid and don't get upset if we
happen to just lose that data file.
And also, we need evangelists.
Go out and just tell people about it.
Be like, look, this exists.
You can use all of your...
Office documents, won't say the word,
all of your office documents
right now for free.
It's amazing.
Stop by mac.openoffice.org,
take a look today,
and help us out as you can.
Thank you very much.
And now I'd like,
it's my pleasure to introduce Lane Roath,
who's going to tell us about OpenPlay.
[Transcript missing]
It's a cross-platform project.
It's standards-based.
It currently is running on Mac OS X.
It has a classic build as well.
It runs under Windows and Linux.
And the Mac OS X build has both a
CFM-based and a Mac OS-based build.
It's a modular build,
meaning that the underlying protocols,
like TCP and Apple Talk,
are plug-in modules.
There's the flexibility to add
new protocols via that modularity.
And in fact, this year,
that flexibility has been used.
And the use has been to
add Rendezvous support.
It's got a large adoption.
A lot of titles are using it,
a lot more titles coming out.
Most of these titles happen to be
games because of the NetSprocket API,
and that's what people know.
But there's no reason that
it is a games-only API.
You can use it for any kind of
quick networking that you'd like.
It has a few simple layers.
Your application can talk to
any of the layers directly.
There's the game interface,
which is the NetSprocket API.
It's very easy to use.
It handles multiple users.
You can group users.
All that high level stuff is very
easy to do via that protocol.
There's the protocol module,
which is the former OpenPlay,
and it deals directly with
the abstraction of the
modules that you deal with,
TCP, AppleTalk, and you can talk to those
modules directly as well,
whichever you would like.
The game interface, like I said,
provides the easiest way
to add networking to your
game or other application.
It has player management,
game management, packet management,
and again,
it runs on all the different platforms.
The protocol interface
is fairly low level.
It's much closer to like
a sockets based protocol.
It has the protocol agnostic design
so that you can use one API and
you can talk over Apple Talk,
TCP IP, or Rendezvous.
It has the IP module for all platforms.
It has Apple Talk for
Mac OS and Mac OS X.
And it has Rendezvous for Mac OS X.
The next step, of course,
is the newest plug-in module
that was developed by Freeverse
Software and committed back to the
community for everybody to use.
So that should give you an idea of
how easy it is to add a new networking
API if you happen to have the need.
If you want to know more
about OpenPlay and everything
that's going on with that,
there's not an OpenPlay specific
session this year,
but you can learn more about
the general OS X networking,
the higher level CF networking,
and then just the general internet
technologies that are available.